Torch2.0 scaled_dot_product_attention processor (#2303)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/optimization/torch2.0.mdx

    pipe.unet.set_attn_processor(AttnProccesor2_0())

    prompt = "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars"
    image = pipe(prompt).images[0]
    ```

    This should be as fast and memory efficient as `xFormers`.

2. **torch.compile**

    To get further speed up, we can use the new `torch.compile` feature. To do so, we wrap our `unet` with `torch.compile`. For more information and different options, refer to the 
    [torch compile docs](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html).

    ```python
    import torch
    from diffusers import StableDiffusionPipeline

    pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(
        "runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16, safety_checker=None
    ).to("cuda")
    pipe.unet = torch.compile(pipe.unet)

    batch_size = 10
    prompt = "A photo of an astronaut riding a horse on marse."
    images = pipe(prompt, num_inference_steps=steps, num_images_per_prompt=batch_size).images
    ```

    Depending on the type of GPU it can give between 2-9% speed-up over efficient attention. But note that as of now the speed-up is mostly noticeable on high-end GPUs such as A100.

## Benchmark

> We conducted a simple benchmark on different GPUs to compare between vannila attention, xFormers, `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` and `torch.compile+torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention`.
> For the benchmark we used the the [stable-diffusion-v1-4]() model with `torch.float16`, for 50 steps. `xFormers` benchmark is done using the `torch==1.13.1` version. The table below summarizes the result that we got.
> The `Speed over xformers` columns denotes the speed-up gained over `xFormers` using the `torch.compile+torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention`.
> 
> As we can see `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` is fast as `xFormers` (somtimes slighly faster/slower) on all the GPUs we tested. And using `torch.compile` gives further speed-up, but it's motsly noticable on the A100 GPU.

Author: ```suggestion
We conducted a simple benchmark on different GPUs to compare vanilla attention, xFormers, `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` and `torch.compile+torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention`.
For the benchmark we used the the [stable-diffusion-v1-4]() model with `torch.float16`, for 50 steps. `xFormers` benchmark is done using the `torch==1.13.1` version. The table below summarizes the result that we got.
The `Speed over xformers` columns denotes the speed-up gained over `xFormers` using the `torch.compile+torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention`.

As we can see, `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` is fast as `xFormers` (sometimes slightly faster/slower) on all the GPUs we tested. And using `torch.compile` gives further speed-up, but it's mostly noticeable on the A100 GPU.
```

<!--Copyright 2023 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

# Torch2.0 support in Diffusers

Starting from version `0.13.0`, Diffusers supports the latest optimization from the upcoming [PyTorch 2.0](https://pytorch.org/get-started/pytorch-2.0/) release. These include:

> 1. Support for native flash and memory-efficient attention (from xFormers) without any extra dependencies.

Reviewer: I'd maybe remove "from xFormers" here, what do you think?

2. [`torch.compile`](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html) support for compiling individual models for extra performance boost.

## Installation

> To benefit from the native efficient attention and `torch.compile`, we will need to install the nightly version of PyTorch as the stable version is yet to be released. The first step is to install CUDA11.7, as torch2.0 does not support the previous version. Once CUDA11.7 is installed, 

Reviewer: cuda 11.8 works too.

torch nightly can be installed using 

```bash
pip install --pre torch torchvision --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/nightly/cu117
```

## Using efficient attention and torch.compile.

1. **Efficient Attention**

>     The efficient attention is implemented via the [`torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention`](https://pytorch.org/docs/master/generated/torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention) function, which automatically enables flash/memory efficient attention, depending on the input and the GPU type. This is the same as the `memory_efficient_attention` from [xFormers](https://github.com/facebookresearch/xformers) but built natively into the torch. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Efficient attention is implemented via the [`torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention`](https://pytorch.org/docs/master/generated/torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention) function, which automatically enables flash/memory efficient attention, depending on the input and the GPU type. This is the same as the `memory_efficient_attention` from [xFormers](https://github.com/facebookresearch/xformers) but built natively into PyTorch. 
```

>     The efficient attention will be enabled by default in Diffusers if torch2.0 is installed and if `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` is available. To use it, you can install torch2.0 as suggested above and use the pipeline. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Efficient attention will be enabled by default in Diffusers if torch2.0 is installed and if `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` is available. To use it, you can install torch2.0 as suggested above and use the pipeline. For example:
```

    ```Python
    import torch
    from diffusers import StableDiffusionPipeline

    pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16)
    pipe = pipe.to("cuda")

    prompt = "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars"
    image = pipe(prompt).images[0]
    ```

    If you want to enable it explicitly (which is not required), you can do so as shown below.

    ```Python
    import torch
    from diffusers import StableDiffusionPipeline
    from diffusers.models.cross_attention import AttnProccesor2_0

    pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")
    pipe.unet.set_attn_processor(AttnProccesor2_0())

    prompt = "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars"
    image = pipe(prompt).images[0]
    ```

    This should be as fast and memory efficient as `xFormers`.

2. **torch.compile**

>     To get further speed up, we can use the new `torch.compile` feature. To do so, we wrap our `unet` with `torch.compile`. For more information and different options, refer to the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To get an additional speedup, we can use the new `torch.compile` feature. To do so, we wrap our `unet` with `torch.compile`. For more information and different options, refer to the 
```

    [torch compile docs](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html).

    ```python
    import torch
    from diffusers import StableDiffusionPipeline

    pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16).to(
        "cuda"
    )
    pipe.unet = torch.compile(pipe.unet)

    batch_size = 10
    prompt = "A photo of an astronaut riding a horse on marse."
    images = pipe(prompt, num_inference_steps=steps, num_images_per_prompt=batch_size).images
    ```

>     Depending on the type of GPU it can give between 2-9% speed-up over efficient attention. But note that as of now the speed-up is mostly noticeable on high-end GPUs such as A100.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Depending on the type of GPU it can give between 2-9% speed-up over efficient attention. But note that as of now the speed-up is mostly noticeable on the more recent GPU architectures, such as in the A100.
    
    Note that compilation will also take some time to complete, so it is best suited for situations where you need to prepare your pipeline once and then perform the same type of inference operations multiple times.
```

> ## Benchmark

Reviewer: I'd also include the results from the `float32` tests, or at least a summary saying that it can give up to 18% performance improvement over xFormers in Ampere cards, and up to 20% over vanilla attention.

Author: Added the fp32 table as well :)

<!--Copyright 2023 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

# Torch2.0 support in diffusers.

> Starting from version `0.13.0` Diffusers supports latest optimization from the upcoming [PyTorch 2.0](https://pytorch.org/get-started/pytorch-2.0/) release. These include:
> 1. Support for native flash and memory efficient attention (from xFormers) without any extra dependacnies.
> 2. [`torch.compile`](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html) support for compiling individual models for extra performance boost.

Author: ```suggestion
Starting from version `0.13.0`, Diffusers supports the latest optimization from the upcoming [PyTorch 2.0](https://pytorch.org/get-started/pytorch-2.0/) release. These include:
1. Support for native flash and memory-efficient attention (from xFormers) without any extra dependencies.
2. [`torch.compile`](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html) support for compiling individual models for extra performance boost.
```

## Installation

> To benift from the the native effcient attention and `torch.compile`, we will need to install the nightly version of PyTorch as the stable for version is yet to be release. The first step is to install CUDA11.7 as torch2.0 does not support the previsou version. Once CUDA11.7 installed, 
> torch nightly can be installed using 

Author: ```suggestion
To benefit from the native efficient attention and `torch.compile`, we will need to install the nightly version of PyTorch as the stable version is yet to be released. The first step is to install CUDA11.7, as torch2.0 does not support the previous version. Once CUDA11.7 is installed, 
torch nightly can be installed using 
```

> ```python

Author: ```suggestion
```bash
```

pip install --pre torch torchvision --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/nightly/cu117
```

> ## Using efficient attention and torch.compile.
> 
> 
> 1. **Efficient Attention**
> 
>     The efficient attention is implemented via the `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` function which automatically enables flash/memory efficient attention, depending on the input and the GPU type. This is same as the `memory_efficient_attention` from [xFormers](https://github.com/facebookresearch/xformers) but built natively into torch. For more information refer to torch [docs](https://pytorch.org/docs/master/generated/torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention).
> 
>     The efficient attention will be enaled by default if torch2.0 is installed and if `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` is available. To use it just install torch2.0 as suggested above and simply use the pipelines. For example:

Author: ```suggestion
## Using efficient attention and torch.compile.

1. **Efficient Attention**

    The efficient attention is implemented via the `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` function, which automatically enables flash/memory efficient attention, depending on the input and the GPU type. This is the same as the `memory_efficient_attention` from [xFormers](https://github.com/facebookresearch/xformers) but built natively into the torch. For more information, refer to torch [docs](https://pytorch.org/docs/master/generated/torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention).

    The efficient attention will be enabled by default if torch2.0 is installed and if `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` is available. To use it, you can just install torch2.0 as suggested above and use the pipeline. For example:
```

    ```Python
    import torch
    from diffusers import StableDiffusionPipeline

    pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16)
    pipe = pipe.to("cuda")

    prompt = "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars"
    image = pipe(prompt).images[0]
    ```

    If you want to enable it explicitly (which is not required), you can do so as shown below.

    ```Python
    import torch
    from diffusers import StableDiffusionPipeline
    from diffusers.models.cross_attention import Torch2AttnProcessor

    pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")
    pipe.unet.set_attn_processor(Torch2AttnProcessor())

    prompt = "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars"
    image = pipe(prompt).images[0]
    ```

    This should be as fast and memory efficient as `xFormers`.

2. **torch.compile**

> 
>     To get further speed-up we can make use of `torch2.0`. To do so we simply wrap our `unet` with `torch.compile`. For more infomation and different options, refer to the 
>     [torch compile docs](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html).

Author: ```suggestion

    To get further speed up, we can use the new `torch.compile` feature. To do so, we wrap our `unet` with `torch.compile`. For more information and different options, refer to the 
    [torch compile docs](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html).
```

> <!--Copyright 2023 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Reviewer 2: Would be cool to add the perf table of this PR here no?

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

> # Torch2.0 support in diffusers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Torch2.0 support in Diffusers
```

For referring to Diffusers as a framework, maybe `diffusers` is better?

Starting from version `0.13.0`, Diffusers supports the latest optimization from the upcoming [PyTorch 2.0](https://pytorch.org/get-started/pytorch-2.0/) release. These include:
1. Support for native flash and memory-efficient attention (from xFormers) without any extra dependencies.
2. [`torch.compile`](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html) support for compiling individual models for extra performance boost.

## Installation
To benefit from the native efficient attention and `torch.compile`, we will need to install the nightly version of PyTorch as the stable version is yet to be released. The first step is to install CUDA11.7, as torch2.0 does not support the previous version. Once CUDA11.7 is installed, 
torch nightly can be installed using 

```bash
pip install --pre torch torchvision --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/nightly/cu117
```

## Using efficient attention and torch.compile.

1. **Efficient Attention**

>     The efficient attention is implemented via the `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` function, which automatically enables flash/memory efficient attention, depending on the input and the GPU type. This is the same as the `memory_efficient_attention` from [xFormers](https://github.com/facebookresearch/xformers) but built natively into the torch. For more information, refer to torch [docs](https://pytorch.org/docs/master/generated/torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The efficient attention is implemented via the [`torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention`](https://pytorch.org/docs/master/generated/torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention) function, which automatically enables flash/memory efficient attention, depending on the input and the GPU type. This is the same as the `memory_efficient_attention` from [xFormers](https://github.com/facebookresearch/xformers) but built natively into the torch. 
```

This way we don't have to spend an additional sentence to cite the doc.

>     The efficient attention will be enabled by default if torch2.0 is installed and if `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` is available. To use it, you can just install torch2.0 as suggested above and use the pipeline. For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The efficient attention will be enabled by default in Diffusers if torch2.0 is installed and if `torch.nn.functional.scaled_dot_product_attention` is available. To use it, you can install torch2.0 as suggested above and use the pipeline. For example:
```

    pipe = pipe.to("cuda")

    prompt = "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars"
    image = pipe(prompt).images[0]
    ```

    If you want to enable it explicitly (which is not required), you can do so as shown below.

    ```Python
    import torch
    from diffusers import StableDiffusionPipeline
    from diffusers.models.cross_attention import Torch2AttnProcessor

    pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained("runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16).to("cuda")
    pipe.unet.set_attn_processor(Torch2AttnProcessor())

    prompt = "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars"
    image = pipe(prompt).images[0]
    ```

    This should be as fast and memory efficient as `xFormers`.

2. **torch.compile**

    To get further speed up, we can use the new `torch.compile` feature. To do so, we wrap our `unet` with `torch.compile`. For more information and different options, refer to the 
    [torch compile docs](https://pytorch.org/tutorials/intermediate/torch_compile_tutorial.html).

    ```python
    import torch
    from diffusers import StableDiffusionPipeline

    pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(

>         "runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5", torch_dtype=torch.float16, safety_checker=None

Reviewer 2: doesn't work with the safety checker?

    ).to("cuda")
    pipe.unet = torch.compile(pipe.unet)

    batch_size = 10
    prompt = "A photo of an astronaut riding a horse on marse."
    images = pipe(prompt, num_inference_steps=steps, num_images_per_prompt=batch_size).images
    ```

>     Depending on the type of GPUs it can give between 2-9% spee-up over efficient attention. But note that as of now the speed-up is mostly noticable on high-end GPUs such as A100.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Depending on the type of GPU it can give between 2-9% speed-up over efficient attention. But note that as of now the speed-up is mostly noticeable on high-end GPUs such as A100.
```
